There are many different kinds of therapy for ADHD, though some of the methods may vary between children and adults. Types of therapy used to treat ADHD range from dialectical behavioral therapy to mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is generally considered the gold standard for ADHD psychotherapy. While "regular" CBT can be helpful for ADHD, there are also specific types of CBT for ADHD.

This can help with improving daily life struggles such as procrastinating, time management struggles, and poor planning. CBT helps people find new coping strategies and the emotions and behaviors that interfere with implementing strategies. The CBT for ADHD model is organized around three core modules and two optional ones: Psychoeducation and organizing/planning, Coping with distractibility, and Adaptive thinking. Optional ones include: Addressing procrastination, Involvement of a partner or spouse.

Research has shown that this type of therapy may be helpful because of how meditation and mindfulness affect the brain and neuropsychiatry.3

Some benefits may include: Reducing mind wandering/daydreaming and distractibility by improving the functioning of the default mode network in the brain, which modulates attention, Learning to observe emotional states, Emotional regulation, Improved executive functioning. 

Dialectical behavioral therapy is another form of therapy often used for people with ADHD. This type of therapy is focused on teaching people skills to deal with their ADHD through the following modules: Mindfulness, Emotion regulation, Interpersonal effectiveness, Distress tolerance, Impulsivity/hyperactivity and attention. Its efficacy is proven by the fact that the control patients on a waiting list tended to have worsening troubles with attention and hyperactivity while waiting for treatment.Those receiving the treatment fared better, as measured by the State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI), which assesses emotional regulation and impulse control.

While it is technically not psychotherapy, ADHD coaching is gaining popularity as a way of managing symptoms and quality of life for people with ADHD.6 Though there is no standardized protocol, this type of coaching usually includes goal-setting and homework, discussing successes and roadblocks, and problem-solving.

Coaches use text messages, emails, or phone call reminders to help clients meet their goals. People are often encouraged to use self-rewards or rewards from the coach or others.
Supportive therapy is a form of therapy that helps clients optimize the coping skills that they already have so that these strategies can be used to reduce distress and manage symptoms such as time management and organization.
Interpersonal therapy is typically employed to address issues that may have developed between a client and others due to misunderstandings from their ADHD symptoms, such as if their forgetfulness or procrastination are affecting those in their lives.7

One key feature of this type of therapy is that the therapist may use it to help the client see the difference between their inner experience and how their behaviors affect others. This type of therapy may also address personal issues, such as a sense of failure or low self esteem, that often stem from the challenges people with ADHD traits experiences trying to fit in to society's neurotypical expectations. Group therapy can be a helpful way for people with ADHD to learn from other people dealing with similar types of challenges and how they have dealt with or have overcome them.8

A specific type of group therapy for ADHD-I (Inattentive Type) called CBT for ADHD-I teaches group members planning, how to start activities and end activities, lifestyle changes, and how to troubleshoot where they have issues in these areas.8

It combines applying the techniques in the in-person sessions and homework outside of the groups. Mindfulness meditation is also practiced to help group members reduce stress and improve attention regulation. 

Narrative therapy has been found to be helpful in people with ADHD to help reduce the self-stigma they may experience. Many people with ADHD tell themselves that they are lazy and underachieving, leading them to wonder what the purpose of trying is and thus becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.

This type of therapy can also help people identify the "sparkling moments" when things are different from the stories they tell themselves so that they can see their strengths rather than their challenges.

One study of school-aged girls who participated in narrative group therapy found improvement in their school performance following the therapy because they identified and replaced negative self-beliefs.9 Narrative therapy also increased their ability to see that they could find their own solutions to problems (as age-appropriate).

For children with ADHD, typically there are two major ways that therapy is delivered: by parents and by teachers; each for different reasons. Both methods are collaborative, with parents and teachers working together, regardless of which one is leading it.

In parent-delivered behavioral therapies, parents will be taught: How to discipline their child consistently and appropriately for their condition, How to implement structure, How to introduce positive reinforcement, and Positive ways to interact with their child.

In teacher-delivered behavioral therapies, teachers learn similar strategies: how to teach children with ADHD to address their challenges, how to help them with time management and organization, and how to help them overcome emotional and behavioral challenges.

Therapy for ADHD may be particularly challenging because it requires the consistency and structure that many people with ADHD struggle with. But the right therapist will create a space where you can feel safe in managing your symptoms and learn how to live with ADHD.
Behavior Therapy, Including Training for Parents
ADHD affects not only a child’s ability to pay attention or sit still at school, it also affects relationships with family and other children.  Children with ADHD often show behaviors that can be very disruptive to others. Behavior therapy is a treatment option that can help reduce these behaviors; it is often helpful to start behavior therapy as soon as a diagnosis is made.

The goals of behavior therapy are to learn or strengthen positive behaviors and eliminate unwanted or problem behaviors. Behavior therapy for ADHD can include

Parent training in behavior management;
Behavior therapy with children; and
Behavioral interventions in the classroom.
These approaches can also be used together. For children who attend early childhood programs, it is usually most effective if parents and educators work together to help the child.

Children younger than 6 years of age
For young children with ADHD, behavior therapy is an important first step before trying medication because:

Parent training in behavior management gives parents the skills and strategies to help their child.
Parent training in behavior management has been shown to work as well as medication for ADHD in young children.
Young children have more side effects from ADHD medications than older children.
The long-term effects of ADHD medications on young children have not been well-studied.Medications
Medication can help children manage their ADHD symptoms in their everyday life and can help them control the behaviors that cause difficulties with family, friends, and at school.

Several different types of medications are FDA-approved to treat ADHD in children as young as 6 years of age:

Stimulants are the best-known and most widely used ADHD medications. Between 70-80% of children with ADHD have fewer ADHD symptoms when taking these fast-acting medications.
Nonstimulants were approved for the treatment of ADHD in 2003. They do not work as quickly as stimulants, but their effect can last up to 24 hours.
Medications can affect children differently and can have side effects such as decreased appetite or sleep problems. One child may respond well to one medication, but not to another.

Healthcare providers who prescribe medication may need to try different medications and doses. The AAP recommends that healthcare providers observe and adjust the dose of medication to find the right balance between benefits and side effects. It is important for parents to work with their child’s healthcare providers to find the medication that works best for their child.

There is no one-size-fits-all solution to manage life in the context of ADHD. Medication is appropriate in many cases but individuals with ADHD still need to have a good understanding of how their unique brains and ADHD traits impact their lives and relationships.

 

ADHD awareness, skills training and ADHD-Informed Therapy can pave the way and provide individuals with specific ways to manage their time, stay organized and on task, and cope with difficult emotions, as well as other typical ADHD challenges.Common Healthy Coping Mechanisms

There’s a popular saying that “nature abhors a vacuum.”  The same tends to apply in psychology.  That’s one of the reasons addicts often struggle in their recovery.  Giving up an addiction leaves a huge void in many different ways.  It also means you’ve given up one of your primary coping mechanisms.  So, now you need to replace it (as well as any other unhealthy coping mechanisms) with something else  – something healthy and life-affirming, rather than detrimental or downright destructive.

Following are a several examples of healthy coping mechanisms. Some will seem like common sense, while others may seem unusual or foreign to you.  Don’t be too quick to rule out any of these, even if they don’t seem like a good fit at first glance.  For example, maybe the idea of meditating sounds a bit too “spiritual” or “new age” for you, or maybe you’ve always hated any type of exercise.  However, since recovery is a new chapter in your life, it’s also the perfect time to open yourself up to new practices. Exercise is hands-down one of the best coping mechanisms.  In addition to helping you achieve and maintain a healthy weight, sleep better, and reduce your risk of developing a multitude of serious health problems, regular exercise also improves your emotional well-being.  Aerobic exercise (e.g. jogging, brisk walking, cycling, and swimming) has been shown to reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression.  In fact, studies have shown regular exercise to be just as effective as taking an antidepressant medication for depression.  It also reduces stress, boosts self-confidence, and enhances self-esteem. If you find a type of exercise you enjoy and / or do it with a partner, you’ll be much more likely to stick with it. Many charities, volunteer organizations, and self-help / inspirational books were borne out of someone’s pain or anger.  For example, a woman who endured a painful, heart-breaking divorce writes a book to help other women see the light at the end of the tunnel.  A man who lost his wife to ovarian cancer starts a charity to raise funds for ovarian cancer research.  Whether you create your own project or join another, channeling negative feelings into something that will help others is a win/win situation and a great way to facilitate healing.  The key here is to “practice” gratitude, as it doesn’t come naturally for most people. This means to consciously look for things  –  no matter how small  –  for which to be truly grateful.  It might be a cool breeze on a hot day or running water  –  things we often take for granted.  Some people find that keeping a daily “gratitude journal” is a great way to implement this coping mechanism.  When you feel sad, angry, or down, read through your gratitude journal to boost your spirits and refocus your thoughts.  There’s a reason therapists recommend journaling  –  the act of writing down your thoughts and feelings  –  to their clients.  Journaling is a great way to express your feelings  –  both positive and negative  –  in a safe, private place.  Doing so on a regular basis will help you gain insight into yourself.  Expressing yourself on paper also helps ensure that you don’t keep negative feelings bottled up.Meditation is often associated with religious practice, but you don’t have to be religious to enjoy its many benefits.  It can be as simple as taking a few minutes to find a quiet place and sit in silence, focusing on nothing more than your breathing.  When practiced regularly, meditation provides numerous mental and physical benefits by inducing deep relaxation, enhancing mindfulness, and reducing stress. As humans, we’re not meant to be socially isolated.  It’s important to have someone  –  a trusted confidante who’s a good listener  –  with whom you can disclose distressing feelings and thoughts.  Talking about them is a good way to work through them.  This is one of the reasons people go to therapy  –  to “talk out” whatever it is that’s troubling them. Sometimes we all just need to take a deep breath.  Formally practicing deep breathing – whenever you feel angry, upset, frustrated, stressed, or anxious – is an excellent way to reduce those negative feelings and calm yourself down.  Practice breathing from the diaphragm, inhaling deeply and exhaling slowly.